So let's jump into how this YAML file is used and some of the key aspects and
instructions that you're going to find in the YAML file.
So first off,
the docker‑compose.yml file defines, as mentioned, all of our services.
And so this would be things like,
what's the instances of different web servers you might have
running, the different frameworks there, Node, PHP, Java,
whatever it may be; your database services,
caching services, you might have some application server
services, and so on, and so forth.
And so this will just be a normal text file that on its own is not that useful,
but we can run it through a docker‑compose build process.
And this build process can actually generate images that we can
then use to create containers as we run this.
Now the docker‑compose build process you're going to
see is extremely simple, in fact,
it's probably the simplest command we've run throughout the entire course.
That's why I'm a big fan of Docker Compose.
It provides a lot of functionality with just a little bit of
work on your part, so we'll be looking at these commands in a
moment. Now, that's going to generate, as mentioned,
the images. We're going to call these services,
though, once they get up and running. And then on a development
machine just with one little command I can then build out my
services, and then with one other very small command I can then
get those services up and running.
And so it's very, very nice in the development world,
because if I just was given a YAML file with just a few basic commands,
I can actually have all my images ready, and then actually convert
those into running containers and have these services,
if you will,
that are actually up and running. Then I can start
building my code against those services.
So what goes in this docker‑compose.yml file? Well, the first
thing you'll always see at the top is a version.
Now, if you do see a docker‑compose file out there,
just out on GitHub or out on the web somewhere, and if it
doesn't have a version at the very top, then it's probably an old version.
The initial versions of docker‑compose didn't have a version,
but everything moving forward is supposed to have that
as the very first thing at the top.
Now under the version, you can have different options.
You can have things like services, which we'll be talking about,
but you can define other things like volumes and networks as well.
Now for our services,
this is where we're going to define what is it we want to be running once we
build this docker‑compose.yml file, and then get all those images up and
running as containers. So this is where we define,
for instance, Node.js or ASP.NET or Java or PHP.
Our databases, our caching servers, and so on, and so forth would go in here.
Now, there are a lot of different options for defining these.
So, for example,
some of the configuration options you can supply
include things like the build context.
This would be things like what folder do we kind of build from as the
context and what Docker file do you want to use to build that
particular service, and you'll see this coming up.
We can define environment variables, and these environment
variables then can be automatically put into that running
service, that container, at runtime.
So that makes it really nice to swap, for instance,
between an app environment of maybe development, to production, and see how
your app responds to that. We can also define just an image.
Maybe you're not going to build an image, you already have one either local or
up in Docker Hub, you just want to use that as the service.
We can also associate a given service with a network that's
been defined. Now if you'll recall earlier in the course we
talked about ways of linking up,
if you will, Docker containers at runtime, so for instance
linking up a Node.js to MongoDB database. Well,
the recommended way to do that, of course,
is through networks,
and we talked about something called a bridge network and how that can be
used to allow these containers to communicate with each other, and we can
define those networks and then reference them to link things up in our
docker‑compose.yml file. We can also expose different ports and define
those, and we can even define volumes,
including pointing to source code on your local dev
machine volumes, and so it makes it really,
really easy to hook up a volume into a container at runtime.
So let's look at an example that dives a little bit deeper
into some of these different options.
So, as mentioned, we'll have the version at the top,
and then we'll have our services. Now under the services
you then name the different services.
So I have one here just called node.
Now that becomes the name of the service.
Now under that, in this case,
I say I'm going to have a custom build for a dockerfile called
node.dockerfile, and the context is the current folder.
So when it builds, use the current folder as kind of starting point,
the folder context, of how to reference sub‑paths and things.
Now I'm also saying that this node service needs to be associated
with a ‑nodeapp network, and this is a bridge network. And that
will allow me to put this in a specialized network and then
communicate with other services, other containers in that network.
Now, here's another service called MongoDB.
Now in this case I'm not building from a custom Docker file, I'm going
to be using the Mongo image that's up on Docker Hub.
So this will cause it to pull it down and then use that image, and
then notice I'm adding it to the same network, nodeapp‑network. And
then you can even define multiple networks.
In this case, I define a single network called nodeapp‑network,
and then it has a driver, which is our bridge type of network.
Now,
if you're new to the YAML format and you're coming from maybe an
XML background or JSON or something like that,
then this is definitely very different. You'll notice that there's a
little bit of an indentation kind of going on here.
And what's nice about this is, number one, you don't
have to worry about closing tags, so it's very simple that way.
And you also don't have to worry about closing brackets and things,
as with JSON. It's just a different way to do it.
So you can see it's just a simple file. On its own it's not that useful,
but as I teach you and we walk through the different Docker Compose
commands, we can take this and convert it into a node service, a mongodb
service, and then a network that both of those services are in so they can
communicate with each other.
So that's a simple example of what could be in a docker‑compose.yml file.
Now let's look at how we can work with some of the commands
that can take this and convert it into images, containers, and services.